+++
title = "02"

+++
The first hemistich redeploys vocab. from the 1st vs.: 1) The two members of the NP útsān … badbadhānā́n in pāda a were both found in 1ab, but not in the same constituent. 2) áraṃhaḥ ‘you sent speeding’ in b rhymes with aramṇāḥ in 1b and is its antonym. This antonymic pairing might support the suggestion floated just above, that áramṇāḥ is meant to evoke its semantic opposite.

The function of the instr. ṛṭúbhiḥ is unclear. I take it as an instr. of extent of time with the part. badbadhānā́n (so approx. also Geldner; see his n. 2a, though I doubt that a ref. to menses is involved: útsa- is one of the few masculine nouns for water and water sources, so if the poet wanted to make that sort of reference, he could have his pick of fem. nouns). Witzel Gotō take the instr. with the main verb (“sent speeding”), with the sense that after their release the waters now flow regularly (“Du liessest die … Quellen nach geregelten Zeitabläufen … auslaufen”). This is certainly possible, though I somewhat favor the former because ṛṭúbhiḥ is nestled in the middle of the NP útsān … badbadhānā́n.

The form ū́dhaḥ is contextually problematic. Formally it is the well-attested nom./acc. ū́dhar, but I find it difficult to construe an acc. in this sentence. As an acc., it should be the obj. of áraṃhaḥ ‘sent speeding’, but the udder of the mountain should not be subject to such an action, whereas it makes perfect sense as a locatival expression. Both Geldner and Witzel Gotō tr. as an acc. obj., but don’t explain what they think is actually happening. I am inclined to take the form as a nonce locative, though I recognize the strong arguments against this: 1) ū́dhar is very well anchored as a nom./acc.; 2) this r/n stem has two reasonably well-attested locatives already, ū́dhan and ū́dhani. Nonetheless, I wonder if ū́dhar could have been taken as belonging with the sporadic -ar locatives like vanar ‘in the wood’, uṣar ‘at dawn’ (though the presence of undoubted neut. acc. vádhar in the next vs. [3b] might make this harder).

It might be worth noting that ū́dhan(i) is confined to pāda end (except one late Xth book ex.), whereas ū́dhar here is medial. Alternatively, and on second thought, if we take ‘udder’ as referring to the contents of an udder, namely milk, it is possible to interpret it as the acc. it appears to be. For a somewhat similar use of ū́dhaḥ as ‘milk’, see IV.1.19. I would therefore suggest an alt. tr. by deleting the parenthetical “(in?)” and adding a comma after “seasons”: “you … sent speeding the wellsprings that had been hard pressed through the seasons, the udder [=milk] of the mountain.” The ppl. práyuta- is variously rendered: Grassmann ‘achtlos, sorglos’, Geldner ‘nachlässig’ (careless, negligent), Witzel Gotō “(alle und alles) verscheuchend” (scaring away). However in all its occurrences it seems to mean ‘spread out, dispersed’. There are four attestations in the RV. Two passages involve cows wandering without a herdsman (III.57.1, X.27.8); in the third (III.55.4) Agni has been dispersed into various hearths and lies spread out at a distance (śáye … práyutaḥ), very much like here (práyutaṃ śáyānam). Since this root √yu means ‘separate, keep apart’, my suggested meaning is closer to the root meaning than the suggestion registered above. It is also possible that it does mean ‘scattered, dispersed’ here, if it is interpreted proleptically: after having been smashed, the various parts of the serpent’s body lie spread across some distance. A similar picture is given in I.32.7 purutrā́vṛtró aśayad vyàstaḥ “Vr̥tra lay there, flung apart in many pieces,” with a form of √śi as here. I would then suggest an alternative tr. “having smashed the serpent (so it was) lying dispersed.”


<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/05/031/02-03.md">
<details open><summary><h2>02-03 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

An etymological sequence -- táviṣīm (2d), táviṣībhiḥ (3b), távyān (3d) -- that also builds to a climax, from singular ‘(a) power’ to plural ‘powers’ to the comparative ‘more powerful’, all associated with Indra.

The sequence of vs.-init. t(i)yá- cid ‘that very one’ discussed in the published introduction.

begins in 3a with t(i)yásya cid (and continues with t(i)yáṃ cid in 4a, 5a, 6a, 8a). Note that it follows distracted vs.-init. t(u)vám in 2a and second-position cid in 2c: combining the two produces, by variation, t(i)yáṃ cid. That cid in 2c follows áhim ‘serpent’ provides the referent for the t(i)yá- forms to follow. The sequence comes to a temporary close in vs. 6, with táṃ cid opening pāda c a variant of t(i)yáṃ cid opening 6a. There is then a brief revival of the phrase in 8a, after skipping a vs. ### 03
In c ékaḥ … apratíḥ “alone (and) unopposable” applies to (the unnamed) Vṛtra, but these two words appear elsewhere similarly juxtaposed but applied to opposing referents: IV.17.19 bhū́rīṇy éko apratī́ni hanti “alone he smashes the many unopposable things” and VIII.90.5 tváṃ vr̥trā́ṇi haṃsy apratī́ny éka íd “You, alone, smash the unopposable obstacles.” This is another example of this hymn taking standard phraseology and turning it on its head. Note that an almost identical phrase, ékaḥ … ápratītaḥ (again with the two words in the same case with the same referent), is applied to Indra in 9b in the triumphant announcement of his universal superiority (see published introduction.). Though Vṛtra thought (mányamānaḥ) he had these qualities in our 3c, Indra possesses them for real -- as shown by the phraseological transfer from the one to the other.

</details>
</div>