+++
title = "05"

+++
The referent of the phrase “both riches of the people” (rā́ya ubháyāso jánānām) is not entirely clear. The standard assumption is that it refers to material goods of some sort, but which are the two kinds? Geldner (n. 5b) cites Sāyaṇa on the TB for heavenly and earthly riches -- though Sāyaṇa on our passage suggests rather (domestic) animals and non-animals (paśvapaśurūpāṇi). Geldner’s own suggestion is our own goods and those of our enemies, based on VII.83.5 yuváṃ hí vásva ubháyasya rā́jathaḥ, where the publ. tr. (jpb) tentatively suggests rather those of war and peace. Acdg. to Renou, they are material and spiritual goods, which he thinks are rayí- and vásurespectively -- a completely arbitrary and ad hoc differentiation of these two extremely common stems, not supported in other passages as far as I can see. Geldner’s interpr. is more plausible, but it seems strange to announce that goods of whatever sort “strengthen” Agni -- esp. as in vss. 2-3 Agni is depicted as the bringer and provider of goods for us. I have a completely different view of the phrase -- that it refers metaphorically to manpower. In VI.14.3 the “riches of the stranger” (rā́yo aryáḥ) contend with each other (spárdhante), where the verb invites an animate referent for the subject. Moreover, ubháya- regularly refers to two different groups of beings: e.g., I.60.2 ubháyāsaḥ … uśíjo yé ca mártāḥ “both … his (ancient) priests and mortals (now)”; II.2.12 ubháyāsaḥ … stotā́raḥ … sūráyaś ca “both praisers and patrons.” In II.6.7 jánmobháyā “both breeds” refers to the human and divine races, similarly jātā́m̐ubháyān in IV.2.2. Here either human/divine or patrons/singers (or some other division of mortals) would be possible, but I favor the latter, given the concentration on humans and their ritual activities here.

