+++
title = "18"

+++
For the idiom in sūrī́n kṛṇuhí … ardhám, cf. II.30.5 asmā́n ardhám krṇ̥ utāt.


<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/17-18.md">
<details open><summary><h2>17-18 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

These two vss. contain two exx. of unexpectedly accented 2nd sg.

impvs.: 17a jahí and 18d kṛṇuhí, both internal to the pāda and preceded by material belonging to the same clause. Oldenberg cites both (in a list of other puzzling passages; ZDMG 60: 736), but provides no real explanation. In both cases it is possible to construct ad hoc justifications. For the jahí of 17a, note that 17d also contains an accented form of this same impv. (though with metrically lengthened final) in the sequence prá mṛṇā jahī́ca, where jahī́contrasts with the immediately preceding impv. prá mṛṇā and has its accent honestly, as it were. It could be that jahí in pāda a received the accent redactionally or as a poetic imitation of the jahī́later in the vs. As for kṛṇuhí in 18d, it might be taken as contrastive with the (rather distant) imperativally used injunctive kaḥ at the end of b to the same root; however, they are not used in the same idiom. It’s also worth noting that kṛṇuhí is followed by particles that ordinarily take 2nd position in a clause (smā no), and so kṛṇuhí by default appears to be in 1st position. And both 17a jahí and 18d kṛṇuhí are right after the caesura. But none of these explanations seems sufficient -- e.g., post-caesura position does not induce accent on verbs -- and I think we must consider these two exx. as peculiarities of the composer of this tṛca.

</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/16-18.md">
<details open><summary><h2>16-18 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

Here the power of soma to rouse Indra to beneficial action is the general subject of the tṛca. The three forms belonging to √pā ‘drink’ in the 1st hemistich, pā́tram ‘drinking cup’, indrapā́nam ‘giving drink to Indra’, and apāyi ‘has been drunk’, in echoing the first word of the preceding vs. (15a pā́tā ‘drinker’), may have caused this tṛca to be grafted onto the last.

</details>
</div>