+++
title = "23"

+++
As Geldner points out (n. 23cd), in the 2nd hemistich Soma the god is differentiated from soma the drink, with the god finding the distant, hidden drink.

tritéṣu is the only pl. form to this stem in the RV, and it is not at all clear what it is doing here. Geldner takes it as the PN Trita, with the pl. referring to Trita and his brothers, among whom Soma (the god) finds soma (the drink). But I know of no such narrative, and Geldner does not cite one. I take the form instead as representing the older adj. ‘third’ (see EWA s.v.), the older correspondent of tṛtī́ya- ‘third’ (which, of course, is also old, having Iranian cognates). As is well known, there are three heavens, and I take the “third realms of light” to be the third or highest heaven, here in the pl. because it is conceived of as further subdivided. For soma as resident in the third heaven, see K. Klaus, Die altindische Kosmologie, 175 with n. 66. It is possible (but only possible) that the vs. implicitly depicts the three heavens, with the dawns in the nearer one, the sun in the middle, and the soma in the third. The drink is threefold presumably because of the three pressings of the soma sacrifice.



<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/22-24.md">
<details open><summary><h2>22-24 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

As noted in the published introduction, repetition also characterizes this tṛca: the ayám that opens every hemistich, along with two other pādas (23b, 24b). In all instances the referent is Soma, whose name, however, does not appear until the opening of the last pāda, 24d (though the reliable synonym índu- ‘drop’ is found in 22d). The beginning of the first vs., 22a, identifies the subject as a god (ayáṃ deváḥ), and the tṛca attributes powerful agency to him, including deeds generally associated with Indra, such as the defeat of the Paṇi (22b), the placing of light in the sun (23b), and the propping apart of the two worlds (24a). It is only the specification of Indra (in an oblique case) as the “yokemate” of “this god” early in the tṛca (22b índreṇa yujā́) that prevents the audience from assuming that ayáṃ deváḥ refers to Indra (who is, after all, the dedicand of the hymn). Nonetheless, the virtual identification of Soma with Indra is clear.

</details>
</div>