+++
title = "08"

+++

<details><summary>+Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

The passive interpr. of the pf. part. papāná- in 7b is affirmed by the pass.

aor. apāyi in 8a.

Similarly, the second pāda clarifies the sense of 7b, where it was said that soma “has perceived what is better for the gods.” What is better seems to be the gods’ intent, announced here in 8b, to achieve glory. The VP mánas √kṛ generally means ‘set one’s mind on/to’; cf. V.61.7, I.54.9, II.26.2=VIII.19.20 (though V.30.4 and X.117.2 are outliers).

The forms grouped by Grassmann under a stem mahás-, an adj. meaning ‘gross’, generally have other interpr., either adverbial or belonging to a diff. stem (e.g., gen. sg. to máh-). Although a suffix-accented adj. mahás- built by accent shift to neut.

máhas- ‘greatness’ would fit the standard pattern (type yáśas- ‘glory’ à yaśás- ‘glorious’), the realization of the pattern in this lexical item seems to have been rare to non-existent. In this passage most (Grassmann, Geldner) do take maháḥ as a neut. adj. to this stem, modifying nā́ma (“acquiring a great name”), but because of the general avoidance of such an adj. I prefer to take maháḥ as the masc. nom. sg. to mahá-, a quotation of the name he received.

In keeping with the interpr. of the root √ven as ‘track, trace, seek’, I interpr.

its grdv. venyá-, when not a PN, as ‘(worthy) to be tracked/sought’.



<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/07-09.md">
<details open><summary><h2>07-09 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

On the meter of this tṛca see Oldenberg, Proleg. 91 and Holland &amp; van Nooten Rig Veda edition metrical comm. The fading in and out between Virāj and Triṣṭubh is further complicated by the openings of 3 in 11-syllable lines in 7b, c.

The tṛca concerns soma and contains lexical and thematic responsions.

</details>
</div>
</details>
