+++
title = "15"

+++

<details><summary>+Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/05/044/14-15.md">
<details open><summary><h2>14-15 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

As was just noted, the final ná svapán of 13d provides a segue into this two-verse appendix with its 6 occurrences of jāgāra ‘is/stays awake’. The two vss.

are strictly responsive -- so strictly responsive that the replacement of yó in abc by agnír produces an awkward set of 12-syllable lines with Triṣṭubh cadence, an awkwardness surely meant to call attention to their tight twinning. The vs. pair is structured as a riddle + solution, though, given what we have just waded through, not a very challenging puzzle. The focus seems to be on Agni, since he is the solution to the riddle; the balance of the two ritual substances found in the rest of the hymn (if I am correct) thus appears to be disturbed. But I do not think that this means that Agni is the sole subject of the hymn, as Scarlatta suggests in his final comment (in Witzel Gotō).

Rather the final word is found in the last pāda of both vss., the direct address of Soma to Agni (tám ayám sóma āha “to him does this Soma say”): távāhám asmi sakhyé nyòkaḥ “I am at home in fellowship with you.” It is the fellowship of Agni and Soma, intimately joined here and identified by name, though neither of them was named previously in the hymn, that we are left with and that allows us to revisit the many obscurities that preceded this statement.</details>
</div>
</details>
