+++
title = "14"

+++
My semantic reasons for rendering áditim as ‘boundlessness’ here, rather than as the PN of the goddess (contra Geldner/Renou), are given in the publ. intro. I would add here that √dāś almost never otherwise takes an acc. of the recipient of the pious service (except V.41.16 and possibly VI.48.2), but does occasionally take an acc. of the offering (e.g., I.71.6, 93.3). It’s also the case that áditim makes an irregular cadence: it should have an initial heavy syllable, though I don’t know what to make of that or how to repair it. There is also some phonetic play between pāda-final áditim and the final of 13a (havy)ádātibhiḥ.

Geldner, flg. Sāyaṇa, takes víśvā (< víśvéd, i.e., víśvā+íd) with jánān and explains its neut. pl. form as attraction to udnáḥ, “das trotz der maskulinen Form doch Neutr. ist”

-- a convoluted and quite dubious explanation. It seems best to take the neut. pl. form
seriously (with Renou; see also Oldenberg) and supply another (underlyingly masc. pl. ) ‘all’ with jánān, by perserveration, as it were. (Oldenberg and Renou do not go that far.) As for Geldner’s supposed udnáḥ, the Saṃhitā text of d reads dyumnaír udná iva tāriṣat, and the Pp. analyses the 2nd word as udnáḥ. But, as the Holland & van Nooten Rig Veda edition restoration udná ‘va shows, the pāda has one too many syllables. Moreover, the second syllable of udná would be better heavy. I follow Gr in assuming an instr. udnā́here, despite Oldenberg’s curt dismissal. The underlying text may have been either udnéva or udnā́‘va. I find entirely baffling the Oldenberg/Geldner preferred underlying form udnáḥ (presumably because they wish to follow the Pp.) and their analysis of it as acc. pl. masc. because the expected neut. pl. cannot be produced (“für den kaum herstellbaren neutralen,” so Oldenberg). Why would *udā́(ni) be blocked when áhā(ni) ‘days’, to an entirely parallel stem, is produced frequently and easily? Renou prefers taking putative udnáḥ as a gen. sg., which has the merit of not arbitrarily changing the stem’s gender, but requires supplying an acc. (kṣódaḥ) for it to modify. Oldenberg’s objection to the instr. sg. is that it isn’t parallel to the accusatives over which the mortal is crossing. But instr. udnā́is the idiomatic expression for traversing water (cf. V.45.10 udnā́ná nā́vam anayanta), and we have already had another instance of case disharmony in parallel expressions (see comm. on vss. 11-12).

