+++
title = "06"

+++

<details><summary>+Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/009/05-07.md">
<details open><summary><h2>05-07 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

The last three vss. of this hymn are dominated by play on the syllable ví, which is also evident, though recessive, in the first part of the hymn. Starting with 5c every hemistich begins with ví: 5c víśve, 6a ví, 6c ví, 7a víśve; note also ví in the middle of 5d and 6a and beginning 6b. This sequence culminates in 7c vaiśvānaraḥ, whose first syllable is phonologically a vṛddhi form of vi and whose first member vaiśva- is morphologically a vṛddhi derivative of víśva-. That the two forms of víśve in 5c and 7a are in the syntagm víśve devā́ḥ “all the gods” and the 2nd member of vaiśvānará- is contrastively -nara- ‘man’ makes the pattern all the more pleasing.

And of course it is Agni Vaiśvānara who is the source of the poet’s revelation and therefore the focus of the hymn. The stationing of vaiśvānaráḥ at the beginning of the last hemistich of the hymn also forms a ring with the same form at the beginning of the second hemistich of the 1st vs. and reinforces the omphalos structure.
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/009/05-06.md">
<details open><summary><h2>05-06 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

The transference of the properties and powers of Agni to our poet is explicit in these two vss. In 5a Agni is light set down or deposited (jyótir níhitam); in 5b he is “swiftest mind” (máno jáviṣṭham). In 6b the poet comments on “this light that has been deposited in (my) heart” (idáṃ jyótir hṛ́daya ā́hitaṃ yát; note the neardeictic idám again), and in 6c “my mind goes widely” (ví me mánaś carati).

The two vss. are also contrastive. In 5 all the gods sharing the same mind and the same perception (sámanasaḥ sáketāḥ) converge on Agni as the single focus of their intention or resolve (ékaṃ krátum abhí ví yanti sādhú), whereas in 6 the poet vividly describes the dis-integration of his senses, emphasized by the repetition of ví ‘widely, apart). But rather than expressing a worrisome loss of physical and mental control, the vs. seems rather to dramatize the exciting expansion of his sensory horizons, the limitless potentials for thought and speech that he now experiences. His ears flying apart (ví me kárṇā patayataḥ), his mind moving widely (ví me mánaḥ carati) are anticipated by Agni’s mind “swiftest among those flying” (jáviṣṭham patáyatsu), and the insistent ví in this vs. is given a positive spin by the pattern of vi-s leading to vaiśvānará-, as discussed above. In the omphalos structure this vs. is twinned with vs. 2, where the poet worried about his lack of knowledge and skill; here his mind and body can literally not contain the possibilities. One index to the change in his mental attitude may be shown by the difference in mood between the tentative subjunctive vadāti in 2d and the purposeful future vakṣyāmi in 6d. Both are in questions, but the first wonders “whose son will (be able) to speak …?” while the latter seems only to question which of the many possibilities he should begin with: “what shall I say?” There are only two finite forms of the future to √vac in the RV (plus one participial form), so the choice of this form must be marked here. The other is pravakṣyā́maḥ in I.162.1, announcing the recital of the heroic deeds (vīryā̀ṇi) of the horse to be sacrificed and therefore functioning exactly like the more common, likewise annunciatory prá vocam (e.g., in the famous opening of the Indra-Vṛtra hymn I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi prá vocam). The correspondent of this future is found rather often in Oldenberg Avestan, where 1st sg. (fra) vaxšiiā regularly performs the same function of proclamation, as in Y 30.1, 45.1 — perhaps indicating a common IIr. employment of this future as an introducer of formal praise. The use of this form here suggests that our speaker is foreseeing his role as official encomiast and poet of record, not simply casting about for something to say. It is possible that svid (kíṃ svid vakṣyāmi) contributes to this sense, but I don’t have a good sense of the function of this particle in the RV.

</details>
</div>
</details>
