+++
title = "22"

+++

<details><summary>+Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

With Oldenberg, I reject the interpr. of cid in abc as a simile particle (contra Sāyaṇa and Geldner); in all three cases the cid can be interpreted in its usual ‘even, even though, just’ sense. However, I differ from Oldenberg on the purport of the vs. He thinks it describes concrete events, possibly as a “Beschreibung von Zauberhandlungen,” while I think it contains two figurative descriptions of the impotence of the enemy -- in this I am closer to Geldner’s notion of similes than to Oldenberg I also find myself in the odd position of being in general agreement with Griffith’s interpr. (based on Ludwig’s).

Each hemistich describes an action involving great effort and drama that produces trivial and insubstantial results. In ab an ax is thoroughly heated, but this formidable weapon only cuts off the blossom of a silk cotton tree. (That silk cotton tree flowers are a vivid red might remind the audience of the real blood that might have been shed by a blazing hot ax.) In cd a pot, also heated, is boiling (yéṣantī), indeed has boiled over (práyastā), but all it produces is foam.



<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/03/052/21-24.md">
<details open><summary><h2>21-24 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

As noted in the published introduction, these vss. are traditionally taken as depicting the rivalry between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha, but I see no sign of this here; certainly Vasiṣṭha is not mentioned. The verbal link is supposed to be VII.104.16 adhamás padīṣṭa “let him fall lowest,” a curse uttered in a Vasiṣṭha hymn that echoes our 21c ádharaḥ sás padīṣṭa. But in neither case is the opponent named, and there is no reason to assume that Vasiṣṭha directs this at Viśvāmitra or vice versa.

The first vs. of this sequence (21) is quite straightforward; vs. 22 is more complex, but I feel fairly confident in its interpr. But vss. 23-24 are very difficult, and my interpr. is correspondingly quite provisional.
</details>
</div>
</details>
