+++
title = "21"

+++

<details><summary>+Jamison Brereton Notes</summary>

Given the parallelism of the phrase vṛ́ṣā síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām, it is clear that the gen. pl. stíyānām must be in semantic complementarity with síndhūnām ‘of the rivers’. Almost the same pair is found in VII.5.2, with a substitution for the first nom.: netā́síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām. Grassmann glosses stíyā- ‘Schneefeld, Gletscher’, but, given the relative lack of attention to snow and the like in the RV once the Indo-Aryans had left the high mountains mostly behind, some other type of water contrasting with rivers seems more likely -- with Geldner’s “der stehenden Gewässer” a likely alternative (cf. also Lüders, Varuṇa I.144). Renou’s “eauxstagnantes” (EVP XIII.56 and 141), though expressing a similar contrast, is less appealing because of the negative implication of “stagnant waters”: would Indra really want to be their bull? The question then is what the form is derived from; EWA classifies it with the root √styā ‘be stiff’, of limited attestation in Skt. but found also in MIA, which seems reasonable. However, I am tempted to see a primary or secondary association with √sthā ‘stand’, since forms of this root (with the sense ‘stand still’) can be used of waters. Cf., e.g., the famous phrase describiing the rushing of the waters freed by Indra in the Vṛtra battle in I.32.10 átiṣṭḥantīnām “of those (waters) not standing still.” Renou (EVP XIII.141) in a lapidary comment -- “fait comme díya-” -- seems to hint at a direct derivation (díya- to √dā, then stíya- to √sthā) without pursuing it, and Lubotsky (System, 104) tentatively suggests that it belongs to an *-i-enlarged form of √*steh2, viz. *steh2-i-, but doesn’t further spell out the details. The trick of course is to keep the laryngeal from aspirating the t; if we start with Lubotsky’s root, the zero-grade *sth2-i- would presumably metathesize to *stih2 (as with √pā(y) ‘drink’: pītá-), which would yield stiy- before a vowel. But I have no commitment to such an analysis. In any case it is impossible to tell whether the form belongs to a short or a long a/ā stem, since it only shows up in the gen. pl.


<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/06/043/19-21.md">
<details open><summary><h2>19-21 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

This tṛca has a more obvious unifying feature than the last several: the repeated ‘bull’ words, vṛ́ṣan- and vṛṣabhá-. I count 16 exx. of the two stems in the three vss. The bull(ish) grammatical subjects of the three vss. are different: 19 Indra’s horses, 20 the soma drinks, 21 Indra himself. The vṛ́ṣan- stem predominates; vṛṣabhá- only appears beginning in the last pāda of 20 (though prepared for by instr.

pl. vṛ́ṣabhiḥ in 20c). I do not see any appreciable difference in their usage; note the coreferential dative vṛ́ṣṇe … vṛṣabhā́ya in 20d and, even more striking, the use of the two stems in strictly parallel expressions in 21a and b: vṛ́ṣā … divó vṛṣabháḥ pṛthivyā́ḥ “the bull of heaven, the bull of earth” and vṛ́ṣā síndhūnāṃ vṛṣabhá stíyānām “the bull of the rivers and the bull of the standing waters.” Nonetheless, Geldner carefully distinguishes them, with Bull reserved for vṛṣabhá- and vṛ́ṣan- rendered as Riese / riesig ‘giant’. But I very much doubt if the intent was “you are the giant of heaven, the bull of the earth,” etc.

The concentration on the bull words leaves little room or energy for other poetic flourishes.

</details>
</div>
</details>
