+++
title = "29"

+++
Pāda a contains what appears to be an etymological figure, but I consider it somewhat trickier than that. The first two word, hinvānó hetṛ́bhiḥ, are transparently related and easy to construe together, and IX.13.6 hiyānā́ná hetṛ́bhiḥ “like (horses) being driven by their drivers” displays the same apparent configuration. However, the instr. in our passage is followed by a ppl. yatáḥ ‘held, guided’, which is regularly preceded by an instr. agent, often nṛ́bhiḥ (approx. 10x in IX), or in this very hymn, vs. 15 vājíbhir yatáḥ “guided by the prizeseekers.” So I suggest that hetṛ́bhiḥ is actually the agent for following yatáḥ, though also adjacent to its etymological kin - a fine twist on the RVic poetic trick of positioning a word between two words both of which it could be (or indeed is) connected to. A more literal rendering of the pāda would be “ "... impelled, by the impellers held.” The simile in c is problematic for several reasons. To begin with, the subject of ab is singular, but the simile must be couched in the plural, given the pres. part. sī́dantaḥ. This is less of a problem than it appears: first, this hymn and soma hymns in general regularly switch back and forth between sg. (soma) and pl. (soma drinks / drops, etc.) referring to the same substance, and this could easily be a unmarked case of that. Moreover, if the target of the simile is in the pl., it can have attracted the participle into the pl.

This raises the question: what is soma being compared to? and the related but more technical question: is vanúṣaḥ nom. pl. (and therefore the simile target) or some other case (acc. pl., abl./gen. sg.)? Because we need something to license the pl. of sī́dantaḥ and because we need something to compare the soma to, taking vanúṣaḥ as nom. pl. seems the most economical solution - although this requires discounting the attractive parallel adduced by Geldner, I.26.3 sī́dantu mánuṣo yathā. In that passage mánuṣaḥ, which rhymes with our vanúṣaḥ, is gen. sg. (and the pl. impv. sī́dantu simply agrees with the pl. subject in ab).

That vanúṣaḥ is nom. pl. is also the judgment of Geldner and Renou, though with vastly different semantics. Geldner “wie die wetteifernden Reiter(?)” (I have no idea where he gets the “riders,” and his question mark shows his uncertainty about it; nonetheless it was taken up by Ober [II.245] as evidence for horseback riding in the RV!); Renou “(s’asseyant au séjour du Ṛta) comme les dévots qui s’(y) asseoient.” Renou seems closer to the mark, though still pretty far from it. Because of the repetition noted above (ad 22-24) of the trope “sit on the womb of truth” (4x in this hymn), it seems likely that sī́dant- here would evoke this recurrent expression, which is certainly appropriate to the soma (drinks) that are the subject of the simile. It is more difficult to identify who or what vanúṣaḥ refers to. This stem, and the associated denom. verb, can have both positive and negative values, expressing various types of eagerness and craving: “striving, eager, zealous, etc.” on the one hand (hence Renou’s dévots), “over-zealous, covetous, rapacious, etc.” on the other. Before identifying its usage in this particular passage, I’d like to introduce a third term into the simile. In similes involving sitting, the comparandum is often a bird - e.g., śyenáḥ in nearby IX.61.21 =



<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="2" unfilled url="/vedAH_Rk/shAkalam/saMhitA/jamison_brereton_notes/09/064/28-30.md">
<details open><summary><h2>28-30 ...{Loading}...</h2></summary>

The contrast between the two types of soma drinks, pure and mixed with milk, are highlighted in this tṛca, at least in my view: 28c sómāḥ śukrā́gávāśiraḥ describes them straightforwardly, while 30ab ṛdhák … saṃjagmānáḥ “separately (and) uniting (with milk)” is more cryptic.

</details>
</div>